In this video we'll look at spanning tree protocol and we'll explain how it helps to prevent switching
loops in Nuneaton that network.
So here we see a diagram where we've got one physical or virtual machine and it doesn't matter.
These could be physical switches.
These could be virtual switches.
They both basically operate the same way.
So we've got some machine here that's connected to either a physical or a virtual switch.
And let's say that that machine generates some sort of broadcast traffic.
Like for example and ARP request well and my switch receives that broadcast traffic what it's going
to do is it's going to flooded out every single pore on that layer to network including this port here
that connects to another physical or virtual switch.
So when that broadcast is received by this other switch it'll go through the same process it will flood
it out all ports even in ports that connect to other network devices and you can probably see where
I'm going with this now is that what's going to happen is that frame is going to eventually end up getting
flooded back to that same switch if our switches are connected in topology that creates this loop and
this will essentially result in an endless loop where the traffic just goes around and around and around
and around and eventually brings my network to a screeching halt.
So switching loops are definitely not a good thing right.
We want to make sure that that we have a loop free typology and Ethernet frames are not configured with
the time to live either.
So an IP packet might be configured with the time to live but that time to live is only for hops across.
ROUDEBUSH So if an Ethernet frame comes in hits one two three four five six seven and so on and so forth
there's no limit to the number of hops that that traffic can take.
There's no time to live to find.
So the way that we can resolve this is by enabling what's called spanning tree protocol and what spanning
tree does is it guarantees a loop free typology.
So how does it do this cause we might have a physical loop in our in our network.
How does spinning tree prevent a switching loop from occurring.
Well what it basically does is it'll detect these loops in the physical network and it will pick certain
connections to block.
It will put certain ports in the blocking state breaking up those loops.
So now when my broadcast comes from this machine that flows out it hits this physical switch and hits
this switch and that's where it stops.
This port is blocked and so therefore the broadcast stops there and the loop is broken.
So spinning tree does a great job of automatically finding these loops blocking the appropriate ports
and ensuring that we don't have these broadcast storms.
But it does so at a cost the network connection that we axed out here this network connection is not
usable that.
So we've lost some bandwidth as a result of blocking certain ports and suspending tree definitely comes
with a cost
but the benefit in most cases outweighs the bandwidth loss.
Because if we do have those Lehre two switching loops in our environment it's just a matter of time
before the network comes to a screeching halt.
So that's the purpose of spanning tree.
Now a few things that I just want to mention specific to configuration with VSE fair.
If you're connecting a physical switch to an ESX host.
So let's say here's my ESX I host them correcting a physical switch to that ESX I host the well in that
case we want to enable a special mode of spanning tree port fast.
Now what port fast does is this for all these ports on my physical switches.
They have to go through a certain process.
When I connect up a physical port basically spanning tree needs to check and validate that this port
is not creating a switching loop.
Right.
And if it is going to create a switching loop it'll get blocked.
And that takes a little time.
This is what we call spinning tree convergence where the switches agree on the typology and the appropriate
ports are blocked.
We don't need that to happen on the ports that we connect to our ESX hosts.
So we'll configure those ports in a special mode called Port fast that'll skip all of those spanning
tree States and the port will come up more quickly.